The Joe Rogan experience.
Did you get a chance to look at that chaos book that I, that I told you about?
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Tom O'Neill, who is a friend of my good friend,
Greg Fitzsimmons wrote an insane book that took him 20 years
about Manson and the CIA and LSD.
And what'd you think about all that? Uh, well.
You've touched on some, I mean,
it's it's or Tom touched on some really interesting things that, uh,
what I liked about his book and I went through it,
I read it is that he's, he's,
he's actually, I think very honest about the shortcomings right.
Of what he ended up doing. Right. And, and,
and the research that he went through and where he couldn't draw connections. I,
so I give him a lot of credit. I think it's, it's well worth the read. Um,
and you know, it's, it's a, it's a hell of a,
just a personal story that it took him this long right.
To make his way through with a variety of reasons. But, um, yeah. It.
Luckily it's been a tremendous success. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. I mean,
it's really, he sold, he sold out almost immediately and, uh,
the paperbacks are sold out too. I mean, he's, I think Manson renting it,
huge draw. Right. But it's also, yeah,
it's a fantastic encount account of all the things that happened with the Manson
family and all those people that were alive back then about how this guy kept
getting out of jail and they, they kept arresting him and they kept saying,
this is above my pay grade and they would.
Yeah. And that's, that's for me,
that's the strangest part about the whole story, right. I mean, I, you know,
this idea that, you know, was Manson, uh, you know,
a lab rat for the CIA and you know, how, how,
how far down that rabbit hole do you want to go well,
is pretty clear about that. Right? It's uh, that's, uh,
not a particularly solid connection. It's a tenuous connection.
I think he called it, um, between one of the, what used to be a, uh, uh,
a contractor, a researcher for a,
that old Chestnut MK ultra John West. Yeah. Yeah.
What did you think about all that? Like, I'm sure you know,
about operation midnight climax and all this stuff. That's absolutely true.
Yeah. I don't know.
It'd be interesting to know how many people are, are aware. I mean,
I know some people that, you know, that that's what they.
Do. Midnight climax operation,
midnight climax was a CIA funded program where they
dosed up Johns.
They created brothels and dosed up Johns with LSD against their
knowledge. Yep. And, uh, without their knowledge and, uh, let them, uh, foreign,
uh, Kate and have a good old time with these ladies of the evening,
man watched them and filmed them and studied them. I.
Know. And when you say it that way, I'm, I'm in,
if you want money for produce that movie, but it's, um, I, it is actually, yeah,
it's true. Look, you have to, it fell under the, uh,
sort of umbrella of this MK altar, which is public knowledge. I'm not, you know,
obviously we're not talking to an attorney. Well.
Let's also give them the benefit.
The doubt when LSD was synthesized by Albert Hoffman,
they really needed to figure out what the this was.
And they need to figure out like, could this be used against Americans?
Could this be used against the president? Or what is this,
is this a truth serum? Like what, what are the benefits?
What's the pros and cons and what are the dangers of this stuff? Well,
that's a national security angle. It's very important that they did study.
It. Right. And so from context, and again,
we talked about that towards the beginning is, is, you know,
which something we don't normally do. Right. So you were,
we're judging people from history now, right. Under the UN.
And so we're not using context of, well, what was the,
what were the conditions if we're talking about the 1950s.
The 1960s or.
Late forties, right? I mean, so, so what have you got, you got the,
the end of the world war II, you got the cold war. Uh, it's the late forties.
Uh, you've got the Soviet union, um,
that is heavily invested in, um,
in a variety of experiments,
mind control brainwashing was this sort of the term of, of, of the culture.
Right. And, and brainwashing was a big issue, uh, w not a big issue, but it was,
it captured people's imagination back then. So the late forties, early fifties,
it was Korean war. Um, yeah. W we had an existential threat,
right. We had nukes pointed each other. We had, you know, drills in schools,
kids hiding under desks. I mean, what the?
So with the fear that the Chinese or the
Soviets were going to develop a mind control abilities
was, uh, pervasive. And it sounds, I know, you know,
you talk about it now and everybody rolls her eyes and goes, oh my God.
But you're absolutely right.
That you have to understand the context with which then Alan Dulles,
who was the, at the time, the director of.
The CIA, by the way, the guy who Kennedy fired yes.
Wound up being a part of the Warren commission after Kennedy was murdered,
which was very strange. Oh, I like that.
I like where that could go. Um, so,
so anyway, uh.
We got, uh, we got Alan Dallas who in 53,
early in 53 says, all right. Um,
we have to understand what the, what the, uh, the Soviets are doing,
particularly the Soviets. Uh, but we also had, you know, uh, again,
I I'm sure some folks listening know all this,
but a lot of folks probably don't we had POW's returning American people,
but others were returning from Korea. That was a big issue, right.
Because some of them came back, um, again, quote unquote, brainwashed, you know,
and, and some of them didn't want to return because, you know, again,
brainwashing, you know, mind control that, you know,
perhaps the Chinese had developed these techniques. So, uh,
initially the idea was defensive.
How do we protect ourselves against this new threat within this cold war against
these enemies who appear to be devoting a great deal of resources against this?
Well, so initially it started out as a defensive effort.
MK ultra was the umbrella name for a whole bunch,
over 140 projects, sub projects underneath them,
MK ultra. And it was all based around, uh, chemical substances,
use of chemicals, use of drugs, um, behavioral, uh,
issues with, with human beings, um, creating false memories,
uh, deleting, uh, memory, uh, influencing the behavior again of, of,
of individuals. Uh,
there were a variety of projects that fell under this MK ultra.
And it was again, starting out as a defensive issue,
but then quickly became a sort of an offense. How do we,
how do we become the leader in all of this, which is typical, right.
That's typical on how things develop. It's like cyber warfare, you know,
initially it's defensive and now you think, okay,
now we got to figure out how to make it work on our backs. And.
Sometimes it's important,
like when they shut down the Iran nuclear program with a virus,
essentially a computer virus.
Yeah, absolutely. And where this went off the rails in, in, in,
in a handful of ways, in many ways, um,
was testing on unwitting subjects,
things such as LSD and in a variety of other substances. Yeah. Woops,
and those subjects, unwitting subjects ranged everything from, uh,
in federal prisons to, uh, state, uh, mental hospitals. Uh,
that's where Manson comes in and that's where Manson comes in and, and, um,
and a variety of other people, um, you know, who, it's just, it's, it's,
uh, I would recommend people, you know, dig in don't, you know, don't settle on,
um, just one account. And one of the things that people should also do,
if they want to read about this is read the,
any testimony that came out of the CIA and the, and there was some testimony,
there were, there were documents written by the inspector general back in 50.
And this, this time period was about 53. Um,
through at least officially acknowledged 64, 19 64.
And then the program was wrapped up. Um, supposedly there were still,
um.
Um.
Federal programs, military programs,
others that we're still looking into issues related to, uh,
the use of, uh, chemical substances, uh, for everything,
again, from interrogation to, um, uh, behavioral,
uh, adjustment. And, and a lot of these things were, were funded, uh,
through cutouts. So you'd set up again. This is, you know, early fifties,
mid fifties, early sixties set up, um, uh,
financing vehicles, you know, through say, uh, you know,
what appear to be a non-threatening grant
programs, you know, from research institutes. So you'd, you'd,
you'd loop in academic institutions or researchers,
and MK ultra had at least acknowledged anyway, over 80, uh,
academic institutions and, and others, um,
that were either wittingly unwittingly working on their behalf in various
research programs. So yeah, this, this, uh,
midnight climax program, basically they'd,
they'd kit out a safe house as a brothel. Um, and they would,
uh, uh, have the hookers, uh, slipped LSD or whatever substance to the,
to the Johns. Um, and then behind a mirror, you'd have a,
supposedly like a researcher, right? I mean,
this is work out weird sitting there, you know,
having a drink and watching these, you know, the, the and the John have sex,
and then they'd be analyzing the impact of the LSD on them in terms of their
ability to talk. And, and would they hook her in on it? Yeah.
The was in on it and they.
See an employee of the CIA, uh.
You know, you know, and, and it was, it wasn't just the agency, you know,
like the army was involved in these things as well, but, um, they would get,
you know, cash payments and, uh, oftentimes the, uh,
the get out of jail get out of jail, free card. Um,
uh, you know, ladies, if you're out there, if you're out there.
Listen to me, whatever you need, I'm forward, I'm here for you,
but there wasn't a show. There was talk, you could wear a Boba Fett mask,
we'll hide your identity. But.
I mean, just imagine, I mean, so it's okay. So this was clearly, you know,
clearly, uh, was off the rails, right.
And they had one of the guys that was involved in this, uh, uh,
he was with what used to be called a federal bureau of narcotics, a guy named,
uh, white George White, um, was, you know,
involved in like the San Francisco cat house. And, you know,
according to the stories, he'd sit there and, you know,
with a martini in his hand and watch the couple have sex. And then he,
and he would have like prepped the to say, okay, after sex,
now this appears to be the best time to get them talking.
So ask them about their job. And let's see if they'll talk about their job,
the idea of being, could we influence and, and like, uh, and trap, uh,
potential assets over seas for operational reasons, you know,
was there some use, you know, for operational purposes,
but basically it was just, you know, George getting his rocks off,
watching couples, having sex and, you know, very, very strange.
Um, but you're right in that. And so, again, this, this went on until 64,
MK ultra, interestingly enough, not to, not to spend too much time on it, but,
uh, Richard Helms was the director at the time, uh,
in the early seventies. And, uh, he and a guy named, uh,
Gottlieb Sydney Gottlieb, who was the head of technical services at the agency.
They agreed that the smart thing to do in 73 before Richard Helms left and godly
left the agency was to destroy all the records.
So they purged all the records of MK ultra that they, they thought existed.
Um, this was investigating the church committee back in 75,
and then, uh, uh, 70, I think it was,
they found a bunch of financial records, you know,
that had not been perched because they'd been kept, you know, um,
audits of, uh, and again,
you're talking about like 149 sub projects of MK altar.
So you can imagine each sub project has its own accounting,
and you gotta turn in your receipts for the LSD that you bought,
or the hokey you're paid off or whatever, you know, it's all, here's my receipt.
Can I have my $12 or whatever you paid for a back then?
And so probably not 12 bucks, um, but,
uh, they found some financial records. Um,
and so that became then the matter of another investigation up
on the hill, um, and Stansfield Turner at the time,
the CIA director testified at that point.
And that's why I brought my laptop is because Stansfield Turner's, uh,
testimony is actually pretty interesting, uh, as far as MK ultra goes,
and he talks about, um,
we've attempted to group the activities covered by the 149 sub projects into
categories under descriptive headings. Wouldn't you in broad outline,
at least this presents the contents of these files, uh,
the headings of the categories of all these various projects that ran under MK
altar. And this gives you a pretty good, quick sense of,
of what they were doing at the time research into the effects of behavioral
drugs and or alcohol. There were 17 sub projects,
probably not involving human testing.
This is the testimony from the director of the CIA Stansfield Turner 14 sub
projects, definitely involving tests on human volunteers, volunteers,
19 sub sub projects,
probably including tests on human volunteers while not known.
Some of these sub projects may have included tests on unwitting subjects as
well.
While not known well, not known. And then.
Six sub projects. It definitely involving tests on unwitting subjects, uh,
research on hypnosis, uh,
acquisition of chemicals or drugs aspects of magicians art.
Know what magicians are. Yeah, yeah. Like slipping them a Mickey or something.
You know, how do you do that? Slight of hand studies of human behavior,
sleep research, behavioral changes during psychotherapy, um,
motivational studies studies of defectors assessment and training techniques,
polygraph research funding mechanisms for MK ultra external
research activities, research on drugs, toxins,
and biologicals in human tissue activities who saw objectives can not be
determined from a valuable documentation. Anyway, it goes on,
but it gives you a sense of, of,
of what the hell was happening during this period of time. But again, I,
this doesn't justify it, obviously it doesn't, but you're absolutely right.
That to have a full understanding of this, you have to look at the,
at the context of what,
where we were at the time and where we were with smack dab in the height and
elevation of the cold war, knowing that our adversaries,
our existential threats were engaged in this sort of behavior. Now,
George was not really a researcher or anything.
He would just sit behind a mirror, watching some people, you know, get off. So,
uh, clearly and all the unwitting subjects involved. I mean, but look,
they were slipping, uh, LSD to, uh, agency employees, right.
Without telling them really. Yeah. Oh yeah. Yeah. And, and I mean, it's just,
yeah. It's so.
Yeah, long ago, but it's not,
we have to think about it in terms of the same way we thought about Abraham
Lincoln, that in the context of the times,
this wasn't such a horrendous thing to do, they didn't know any better.
It was really, they didn't know what these substances would do to people.
And there wasn't a lot of ways to find out, you know,
the Harvard LSD studies that they did that they believe in,
in part were responsible for the Unabomber.
There's a lot of other that was responsible for the Unabomber,
including particularly his childhood. But they,
they did a lot of these studies because they, they didn't know. I mean,
there's one way to find out. I mean,
how do you get responsible human subjects?
How do you get people to do well?
Does not a lot of ways other than just test people. Right.
And unfortunately, yeah. What, what this ended up being was, you know,
like using, using the most marginalized people out there, you know,
like sex workers or prisoners or whatever. Right. And oftentimes Johns, or just,
just, you know, but that whole thing, but where we're at Tom O'Neill's book is,
is, you know, is, is really interesting in a couple of ways is isn't it, if you,
if you jump so MK ultra kind of finished up in 64 officially, right.
That's when, you know, the inspector general came out from the agency and said,
this, you gotta, no, you can't, you can't do this.
They had a new inspector general. And they looked and said,
this is clearly not where we are supposed to be. Um,
but interestingly, uh, funding mechanisms, you know,
that were used to, again,
to Dole out grants or to provide a cutout between government and research
that was being done, you know, did some of those continue to exist for other,
uh, programs, other research and in 67,
um, you know, you have, uh, the summer of love San Francisco, um,
and Tom O'Neill writes about this and it's very, very interesting,
but you had the, the Haight Ashbury, uh, free medical clinic, right.
Which in part, uh,
was running a couple of projects that were, uh,
supposedly getting funding from the national Institute for mental health,
which had previously been a funding mechanism also for MK ultra, you know,
a few years in the past. And, um,
Roger Smith was, uh, a guy who was getting his PhD in criminology.
He was working at the Haight Ashbury free medical clinic.
And he was also Manson's parole officer. And,
uh, to your point, Manson was like, it was like a,
a Brook trout or a rainbow trout that is in some catch and release stream.
Right. He was constantly arrested during the 67 68 period. And remember,
is the killings happened in summer, uh, August of 69.
Uh, and you know,
he kept getting released and he had been in prison, right. He came in 67.
He had early in that year, he'd been released from prison. Right.
So he was on probation, any violation,
certainly some of the things he was getting arrested for should've sent him back
to prison, but he wasn't.
So that to me is one of the most interesting parts of the book is this,
this is this revolving door that Manson was in.
And eventually we all know what happened to him. Um, but yeah,
working at the Haight Ashbury free medical clinic,
that's where Manson would go along with some of his followers and, and,
you know, they were, you know, part of a study and, you know, they were,
I'm sure, you know, getting their LSD from there. But, um,
also this guy jolly west who was involved in MK ultra,
uh, also ended up having an office at the Haight-Ashbury free medical clinic.
So, but again, to Tom.
And it closed down about four months after Tom's book came out,
been open for over 50 years. Right. What are the odds? Yeah.
I know. What are the odds? I didn't see that coming. Uh, yeah, but I mean,
you know, again, it's, it's, I liked the,
I liked the book because he does seem to be, um, trying to let the,
the facts of all his research lead the way. Right.
Rather than trying to prove a point that he comes up with at the beginning of
his book.
Well,
it also exposed the prosecutor Bugliosi and all the issues that was going on
with him that led to him wanting to follow the narrative that they
had laid out,
that Manson was trying to incite a race war and right. You know,
and ignore all the other indicators that there was some deeper connections
and.
Yeah. Was Mattson. Uh, uh, was he an,
a former for the bureau or for local law enforcement or, you know,
some other outfit? I, you know, that's a hard to tell,
hard to tell, but it's compelling in light of the fact that he
kept getting released. He competed seem to have a get out of jail free card.
You also.
Seem to have an unlimited supply of acid. That was what's fascinating.
And you also seem to employ the same techniques that apparently the CIA had
employed when they'd done experiments on prisoners,
including the fact that he would, you know,
forced him into weird sexual situations and pretend to take LSD himself,
but not really participate and then, you know, influence them.
And he seemed to be doing things to them in terms of like trying to alter their
behavior and getting them to do things that were outside the norm,
including murder.
Yeah. I mean, did he see, yeah.
Did he have a sense from his time there at the clinic or dealing with, uh,
what's his name? Roger Smith, his parole officer, who again,
was also a criminology doctor, a doctoral candidate, I guess.
And so it was w you know, but look, Mattson was, you know,
he was not a rocket scientist. He was illiterate for the most part, right.
Until he ended up in prison in may, which is.
Why it was so weird that he was able to manipulate so many people. So, well,
I hate it, but it was also it's like what he was the perfect Guinea pig.
I mean,
you're talking about a guy who spent half his life in federal penitentiaries.
Yeah. Yeah. And, and,
and also you're putting it in context of the time. Um,
what else did you have going on? You had sort of this, again, this, uh,
awareness of the impact of LSD on the, on the counterculture, right.
So you had federal agencies like the bureau, for example, worrying about,
oh my God, what's the, you know, w w what are these hippies going to do next?
You know, are they getting, and, you know, they were worried obviously about,
uh, the black Panthers, but it was also more than that. It was the,
it was the anti-war movement.
It's just a general counterculture and the impact of drugs on it. And so it's a,
it's a fascinating, I think it's, I think it's a very interesting read,
and I think it's worth the read, because again,
he's spent so much time trying to make his way through and get this book.
Yeah. It's a crazy story. And if you haven't heard the podcast,
please listen to it with Tom O'Neill.